===========
Consistency
===========

.. include:: <isotech.txt>
.. include:: <mmlalias.txt>

One necessary property of a group session is that everyone sees the same
transcript - that is, the same set of messages and their relative orders.

Concepts
========

Consistency can be viewed as a case of metadata verification. Each message has
a sender, a history, and a set of recipients. We verify the sender using
cryptographic authentication, verify history by enforcing transitivity, and now
we need a way to verify recipients, aka ensure consistency.

Consistency is *not* consensus. Consensus is the problem of agreeing on a
future value or action, that has not been decided yet. With consistency, we
only need to agree on what has already happened in the past. So we don't need
to use Byzantine fault tolerance techniques (which have probabilistic success),
and can achieve a stronger guarantee with simpler techniques.

With consistency, we only achieve "first-order" knowledge - that is, for each
message m, from the point of view of a member u, u knows (P) everyone has seen
m, but u doesn't know if (Q) others know P, nor if (R) they know u knows P,
etc. That's OK; we don't foresee any situation where we need those latter
properties, so they are lesser concerns. For comparison, consensus requires us
to achieve `common knowledge`_ (i.e. "infinite-order" knowledge).

Previous proposals for consistency have typically involved running a process at
the end of a session, to ensure consistency for the whole session. The process
is simple to describe but quite costly in terms of information that needs to be
exchanged for mutual verification.

We prefer an incremental model of consistency, where we continually verify the
other recipients of messages we delivered. Our causal order provides enough
bookkeeping information over the lifetime of the session, such that there is
minimal communication overhead in doing so.

Since we are verifying other recipients, this must be done *after* we deliver
the message (either as the sender or a recipient). If our transport breaks and
we receive no more messages, consistency must not default to "OK". So our
mechanism must include an expiry after which we warn that consistency has not
been reached. That is, we need a timer primitive; we cannot just implement
consistency checks as part of a packet receive-handler.

As with drop detection, if we reach a good state (here, consistency) *after*
the timeout, we should cancel the warning or at least downgrade its severity.
Also, here the warning is associated with a message that is *already displayed*
to the user. Therefore, it is important that the warning is shown not as a
point-event for the user to dismiss and forget, but as a persistent state
shown together with the message, in the same space and time.

.. _Common knowledge: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Common_knowledge_(logic)

.. _full-ack:

Acks and full-ack
=================

We start by looking at per-message consistency. When we see a message, we want
to be sure that everyone else also saw it. Rather than trying to enumerate and
detect all possible failures, we aim for a certainly-good state. We can be sure
that r saw m, if we see a message by r that refers to m. Conveniently, we
already have the mechanics for this in our causal order, namely the property
that every message refers (transitively) to all its ancestors.

Define that a message m is **acked-by** r iff |exists| m' |in| by(r): m < m'.
Define that a message m is **fully-acked** iff |forall| r |in| recipients(m): m
is acked-by r. [#Nvis]_ Both of these depend implicitly on the current
transcript. An "ack" is simply any message that refers to a previous one (the
one being acked), not necessarily a special ACK message. [#Nimp]_

Once a message is acked by everyone else, we are certain that they have seen
it, and we reach message consistency. If we did not send the message, we must
also make sure that we ack it ourselves  - this is necessary for *others* to
reach message consistency. After this, the message is *fully-acked*, and we no
longer need to worry about it. In a valid transcript, a message m becomes
fully-acked at the same point for everyone, namely when a process delivers all
the direct acks { min(by(r) |cap| des(m)) | r |in| recipients(m) }, des(m)
being the descendant messages of m. Notice the similarity in structure to the
definition of context(m) - one may think of these as a "future" context(m).
If and when full-ack is reached, this will contain no |bot| values.

.. digraph:: acks

    rankdir=BT;
    node [height=0.5, width=0.5, style=filled, label=""];
    m [fillcolor="#ff9999"];
    p [fillcolor="#99ff99", color="#ff0000", label="p"];
    q [fillcolor="#9999ff"];
    r [fillcolor="#ff9999", color="#ff0000", label="r"];
    s [fillcolor="#99ff99", color="#ff0000", label="s"];
    r -> p -> m;
    r -> q -> m;
    s -> q;

Background colours indicate authorship, red borders indicate messages that are
not yet fully-acked. If blue then sends a message referring to r, s, it will
cause p to become fully-acked, and help r, s along on the way towards being so.
This is an incremental consistency; full-acks occur as new messages arrive,
instead of all at once at the end of the session.

Between when a message is delivered and is fully-acked, we need a way to check
that it does eventually become fully-acked, and warn or try to recover if this
process takes too long. The mechanism must be pro-active, so it must be outside
of the packet send/recv logic. We'll call this an "ack-monitor", and it would
be activated on delivery and de-activated on full-ack. The basic behaviour is
to warn the user if full-ack is not reached within a grace period. More complex
behaviours that reduce the failure rate, which is vital for usability, are
discussed next.

.. [#Nvis] This definition becomes slightly more complex when we introduce
    :doc:`partial visibility <05-visibility>`; see that chapter for details.

.. [#Nimp] For space-efficiency, one should store *unacked* recipients instead
    of acked ones: when delivered, each message has a set unackby(m) that is
    equal to recipients(m), and it gradually becomes empty as later messages
    (that ack it) are delivered. When the set becomes empty, its ack-monitor is
    cancelled and a "fully-acked" event is emitted. It is also useful to track
    a set unacked() of messages not-yet fully-acked in the current transcript.
    When a message m is delivered, it is added to this set, then removed again
    when unackby(m) becomes empty. TODO: maybe move this to an "implementation"
    appendix.

Automatic and explicit
----------------------

The ack-monitor should also handle the case (for messages sent by others) where
we don't ack the message ourselves. In a busy session, the user will likely
send a message within the grace period *anyway*, that will be implictly treated
as an ack. In this case, we don't need to do anything. However, at the end of a
session, or during a lull in the conversation, we will need to *automatically*
send an *explicit* ack on behalf of a user. This would be a special message
that is not displayed as normal in the user's UI, but is still kept in the
transcript causal order data structure, in order to track full-acks.

There are some nuances about this. The fact the ack is explicit and carries no
other purpose, means that these need not have ack-monitors registered on them.
(In the automatic case, this would result in an indefinite sequence of mutual
acks. This achieves freshness, as described in the next section, but is not
useful for consistency so we'll skip it for now.)

An implicit ack, such as a normal user message, indicates "some" level [#Nack]_
of understanding of previous messages. Automatic explict acks *should not* be
interpreted to carry this same weight, because the user has no control over
whether they actually read those messages or not. If one desires an explicit
"user-level" ack (e.g. in critical situations) there are a few options:

- a manual explicit ack, that must be initiated by the user - like acks in
  `Pond`_, which are just empty messages.

- a pseudo-manual explicit ack, that may be interpreted like a manual explicit
  ack. This is triggered automatically, but only when the user is interacting
  with the application, or has it focused in the foreground.

These would be implemented as a supplement to the automatic ack. Other
projects' terminology for these concepts include "delivery receipt" for
"automatic ack" and "read receipt" for "manual/pseudo-manual ack".

.. _Pond: https://pond.imperialviolet.org/tech.html

.. [#Nack] The user could avoid reading the messages, but we can't do anything
    about this, and it's dubious that this could be abused for benefit. In the
    *average* case, there is some understanding.

.. _reliability:

Reliability
===========

Consistency requires reliability. If some messages aren't received by everyone,
then of course we can't verify consistency.

It is quite common for cryptographic systems to ignore reliability, and assume
it will be covered by a lower layer. The universal prevalence of TCP today
probably encourages this. However, our group messaging scenario introduces some
failure modes that cannot be recovered from by a lower layer, and this section
will explain these and propose a fix. Such failures will eventually cause a
failure of our consistency checks, so it is "safe" to ignore reliability; but
unnecessary failures are bad user experience and may incentivise people to
choose a less secure application, so should be avoided where possible.

To demonstrate what we mean by "unnecessary failures", we'll talk briefly about
existing reliability mechanisms. Typically, these will continually resend a
packet until it gets a transport-level ack from the recipient. These are not
authenticated cryptographically, so transport-level delivery claims are not
to be trusted, which is why we have message-level acks above. A malicious
transport-level attacker can also just drop any packets to break reliability.
However, there are other failure modes that *honest* transports can't recover
from, but that *can* be recovered from at the end-to-end message level.

TCP doesn't communicate ack failures to higher layers. If your partner drops
their connection right after your message is passed to TCP, an ack will never
be received. Our application might automatically start a new TCP session later,
but this won't know about the lost message from the previous session, resulting
eventually in consistency failure. In the instant messaging case, these types
of failure may be rare, but they are still unnecessary. And they become much
more common and problematic if we want to support asynchronous messaging, where
not all users are online at once - there is no Internet standard for a generic
reliable asynchronous transport. [#Neml]_

With transports that run to a third party, such as a TCP session to a central
reflector server, the transport layer does not detect end-to-end reliability
failures, even if the server is honest. No matter how hard the server tries to
guarantee simultaneous presence, some clients may be offline when a packet is
first sent. Some servers try to mitigate this, by resending packets to those
offline clients when they come back online. In XMPP, several mechanisms exist
that approximate this: `session resumption`_ for short transport failures, and
`discussion history`_ as ad-hoc opportunistic context on joining a channel.
However, in both cases the scope of reliability is limited, either time-wise or
packet-count-wise. This is an inherent limitation of public servers: they are
unable to offer *unconditional* end-to-end reliability since this requires
unconditional buffering of unacked packets, but that may be abused by malicious
clients resulting in denial of service. By contrast, clients have the incentive
to indefinitely buffer their own not-fully-acked messages.

That is not to say transport-level, or third-party, or non-authenticated,
reliability schemes are useless. They are quite cheap to run, and recover from
most failures. But the non-recoverable failure rate is much higher in certain
environments or for certain use-cases, so it is prudent to implement a more
expensive but more robust authenticated end-to-end scheme.

.. _Session resumption: http://xmpp.org/extensions/xep-0198.html#resumption
.. _Discussion history: http://xmpp.org/extensions/xep-0045.html#enter-history

.. [#Neml] Email resending is application specific, has a lot of baggage, and
    is generally considered unsuitable to build clean applications on top of.

Resends
-------

Easiest to do resends in the ack-monitor.

For as long as the message is not fully-acked, we may periodically resend the
message, in anticipation that our original message was not received for
whatever reason. This implicit recovery technique results in a simpler protocol
and transcript, without needing an explicit "ensure consistency" message.

However, ack-monitors for an implicit ack am sent directly after a
sequence of explict acks from the same sender, should also resend these
whenever it resends am - recipients must receive anc(am) to be able to deliver
am, and we have no other local active mechanism to resend those explicit acks.

TODO
- refine resends of previous explicit-acks (cf code)

TODO
- ack timing rules, cancel warn-states after full-ack
- discuss overhead of acks

To simplify resends, we suggest to follow the "single-ciphertext principle" -
each message is communicated as the same ciphertext for everyone, and this
applies even if parts of it are encrypted to only a subset of the recipients.
This makes it easy to detect duplicate resent messages, and also allows a
member to resend a message authored by someone else, which is useful if the
latter is absent. All members cache this ciphertext in case they have to resend
it to others. When the message is fully-acked, the cached ciphertext may be
deleted to save space. This should not affect security of the data, since the
threat model already includes an eavesdropper that stores all ciphertext.

However, if an entity can observe multiple recipients receiving the same
ciphertext - such as an XMPP server - then this links the members. Hiding this
metadata is outside of the scope of this chapter, and the single-ciphertext
principle is no worse than existing systems; but newer systems that try to
explicitly provide unlinkability will need to think about this.

TODO
- refine auto-deletion of old ciphertext that has been full-acked (cf code)

Optimising the exact policy of executing resends can get very complex, so we'll
skip that discussion for now. In practise, we have been using an exponential
backoff algorithm, which seems to work adequately.

Duplicates
----------

When you receive a duplicate message m, this is (in a normal situation) because
someone thinks we haven't acked the message yet - and perhaps we haven't. So we
need to ack it, until we are confident they have received the ack:

- If m is still in the delivery queue, ignore the duplicate. We don't even
  know if it's a valid message yet - we haven't received all its ancestors.
  If and when we do, we would already set an ack-monitor on it, which will
  handle any future duplicates.

- If we haven't yet acked m, the ack-monitor we already set on m will handle
  this situation - i.e. either wait for the user to send an implicit ack, or
  send an explicit ack later.

- If we have already acked m, say with message am, then:

  - If the ack was implicit, then we already set an ack-monitor on am, which
    should handle this situation, resending am if necessary. (Perhaps am was
    already fully-acked, in which case m was sent in error, or due to a heavily
    delayed network, or a replay attack. In any case, the ack-monitor will have
    already been cancelled and we ignore m, which is the correct behaviour.)

  - If the ack was explicit, then we don't have an ack-monitor on am, so we
    should resend am. (This is the only case we take action on.)

Note that we say "confidence", not "guarantee". This is because with explicit
acks, we do not check for full-ack (of the ack) - so perhaps it will be dropped
and the recipient will never see it. (If the network is not dropping messages
though, we will see their resend m, and be able to act on it as above.)

We believe that this is not a security problem - it is the responsibility of
each user to check that all messages they see are fully-acked. If our ack is
dropped, then even though we don't know they have received our ack, we know
that they will not treat the un-acked (from their POV) message as part of the
consistent transcript - it is not in their interest to do so. So we don't need
to *guarantee* that our own explicit acks are fully-acked. This avoids the
Byzantine agreement problem.

A related concept that *does* provide a guarantee for explicit acks, is
:ref:`heartbeats <heartbeats>`. These can be thought of as automatic explicit
acks that result in an infinite sequence of mutual acks. But their purpose is
to ensure freshness rather than consistency, and their cost may be unsuitable
for some asynchronous protocols. So we omit them here, and talk about them
separately as an optional feature.

The resend/dedupe scheme outlined above is quite minimal in the messages it
chooses to resend. Of course we may do more active resending; however this may
open up the path to DoS attacks. More research can be done here; for now we
have a good basic scheme with a clear logical justification, so we'll continue
with other topics.

Transcript consistency
======================

Future consistency, consistency-on-leave.

Transcript consistency may be constructed simply out of our message consistency
primitives. When we want to part, we send a "intend-to-part" message zm then
wait for explicit acks to it. Once it is fully-acked, we reach consistency for
all of anc(zm), which we'll treat as the transcript. Recipients should ack
these immediately, instead of the usual behaviour of waiting a grace period for
the user to manually send an implicit ack. Since there won't be any future
chance to receive the acks, the sender may wait longer than usual for full-ack.

If we receive implicit or explicit acks to any message other than zm, we must
ignore them or display/log them permanently with a warning, because we have no
chance to verify their consistency. The same goes for implicit acks to zm.

If we fail to reach full-ack for zm (i.e. time out waiting for it), then we
still have consistency for all the messages we had previously reached full-ack
for, which hopefully is almost equal to anc(zm). For all other messages, we
should display/log them permanently with a warning.

TODO: construct a similar mechanism for cases where someone else wants to force
us to part.

This ensures consistency for messages that we delivered locally, including ones
we sent. What about messages by others that we haven't delivered, including
ones we haven't even received? We'll talk about this in the next section.
