======================
Freshness and presence
======================

Non-causal drops
================

As mentioned at the end of the previous section, we are so far unable to detect
non-causal drops - drops of messages that are not an ancestor of messages we
*have* seen and delivered. This does not affect transcript consistency, as
already argued. However, sometimes we might still want this as a security
property, especially in low-latency protocols.

One way we can do this is via fresh nacks - messages that we can be sure are
fresh (as of time t), that say "no messages sent by u since t". Our by(u) total
ordering encodes the "no messages since" meaning implicitly, so we just need to
prove freshness since time t.

A message m implies its sender was present at time of context(m)(self), if it
exists - we trust our own timestamps, and the partial order establishes the
"after" relationship. If context(m)(self) does not exist, then we'll have to
use something else written by ourselves, such as e.g. a key exchange message
that helped to derive the secrets that m is auth-encrypted by - we don't have a
mechanism to securely trust others' timestamps, and won't try to construct one
here. Note that we just store our timestamps locally, we don't need to send
them anywhere - and they wouldn't trust ours anyway.

The above achieves *end-to-end* security for freshness. By contrast, XMPP
presence is not end-to-end secure - it assumes a trusted server. Neither is
looking at "local receive time of a packet" - it assumes a trusted network.

.. _heartbeats:

Heartbeats
----------

We detect non-causal drops by periodically [#Nreg]_ sending out heartbeats, and
waiting for these to be fully-acked (i.e. setting an ack-monitor on them); this
proves freshness as of the time of the heartbeat. To be efficient, we can omit
a heartbeat if we've already sent another message inside the previous period,
excluding explicit acks which don't need to be acked. We may refer to these
messages as "implicit heartbeats", akin to implicit acks.

If someone takes too long to ack a (implicit or explicit) heartbeat, we should
issue a warning to the effect of "user not present". This is a distinct warning
from message-not-fully-acked - it is triggered for *each member* that fails to
respond, it might have a different timeout than the former, and it would be
indicated on a non-message UI element (since heartbeats might not be displayed
explicitly) - for example by dulling the respective user avatar.

.. [#Nreg] If heartbeats are regular, they may be distinguished from actual
    messages even to an eavesdropper who can't read their contents. (The same
    may be said of regular explicit acks and identical-ciphertext resends,
    though these probably reveal less information.) In general, metadata
    security is a more complex topic, and it is unclear whether these things
    are a real security problem to be worth spending effort on, so we'll note
    the issue but won't pursue it here.

Presence and expiry
===================

Freshness is an indicator of presence, which we'll define roughly as "a good
chance a user will ack messages sent to them". We adopt end-to-end definitions,
so "presence" is considered from the local user's perspective, rather than the
internet - if a user's connection goes down, from their POV everyone else is
absent, rather than themselves. Typically, presence statuses must expire unless
explicitly refreshed, to be able to reliably indicate absence.

Our heartbeats are a rudimentary indicator of presence, one that is only partly
useful since it works within an already-established session. There are many
end-to-end secure presence mechanisms that are more general purpose, e.g. TODO.
Yet other mechanisms are simple but still effective - e.g. detecting that the
local network interfaces are disconnected, is a strong indicator of absence.

Locally, we may integrate our heartbeats with these other mechanisms, for more
accuracy and reliability. The exact logic will depend on the mechanism and what
interfaces it provides for integration, but it should be fairly intuitive and
straightforward. For example, the combined system should indicate presence when
a member acks a heartbeat *or* any external mechanism indicates presence, and
any of these should reset any expiry-based absence indicators.

Intended absence
----------------

The only absence signal we have described so far is expiry of presence. This is
a minimum measure to ensure safety - to detect the inability to communicate,
either innocent (e.g. lack of signal) or malicious (e.g. censorship).

In some applications however, members may want to declare intentional absence
from an ongoing session. This is semantically distinct from parting the session
- absent users still have the *right* to see messages, so these should still be
encrypted to their key. This allows us to support a long-running session where
users go online and offline, but still want to see what was said during their
absence. This is common with some existing centralised hosted chat systems, but
we can achieve this end-to-end too. [#Nsrv]_ If no external presence mechanism
supports this declaration, we may implement intended-absence messages that set
the intended-absence state for the sender, but not otherwise displayed.

Tracking intended-absence as a distinct state from unintended-absence, allows
us to downgrade the severity of warnings that will fire due to it, since now we
know that this is not due to an attack. For example, when a not-fully-acked
warning is about to be emitted, if the users who haven't acked that message are
all intended-absent, then the severity of the warning should be reduced. The
rate of resends may be reduced too, since they won't succeed anyway. (If we
have no other external presence mechanism though, they should not be stopped
completely - otherwise all parts of a partition will stop sending, and we'll
never regain presence.) Later when the absent user returns, the rate of resends
should be restored, or even reset to the maximum.

Absence must be considered when choosing a greeting protocol. A GKE implicitly
requires the presence of certain participants, yet any member may unilaterally
become absent (either declared or faked) and block it from succeeding. This may
be a concern if membership operations are supposed to be reserved only for
special members. As a baseline, we recommended that systems choose a greeting
protocol that may part a member *without their own input*, otherwise anyone may
block themselves from being parted. This topic will be explored in more detail
in later parts.

.. [#Nsrv] A dumb server that just stores-and-forwards the ciphertext may be
    used as an optional component - this has no impact on security, but keeps
    the session history available even in the case that all members go offline.

Timestamps
==========

So far we have avoided communicating any timestamps in the protocol, nor to
rely on specific timestamp values for others' messages. (Heartbeat timestamps
are only used locally as a lower-bound.)

However, specific values for timestamps are useful as a UI indication. How do
we do this?

Limitations
-----------

TODO Clock reliability.

- new device, time not set
- when travelling, some users change system clock instead of time zone
- change system clock for testing and forget about it

Verifiability.

If a member lies in the contents of a message, this is not something the
messaging protocol can detect. We treat timestamps as a similar sort of data -
no other part of the system or the security models depends on them being even
vaguely correct.

Simplest option is to use local delivery time of a message. Additionally, each
message may contain the claimed sender local time, which may be displayed on
the side.

See appendix (TODO: link) for discussion of some more complex techniques, which
may result in better accuracy when users have skewed clocks. However, they are
quite complex and don't achieve very strong end-to-end security (as mentioned
above), which is why they are only in the appendix.
